JUDY WOODRUFF: It's that time
of the year when many folks
flock to beaches, resort towns
and weekend getaways.
Those communities can be quite
dependent on foreign workers
to help staff them through
the summer season.
But this year has a different
kind of pressure point, as the
Trump administration has pushed
for some big changes
on immigration rules.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has a look at the impact
of this supply-and-demand
story.
It's part of his weekly
series, Making Sense.
PAUL SOLMAN: Ah, the
iconic seaside summer
getaway Provincetown
at the tip of Cape Cod.
A single mom prison guard in
New York state, Joy McNulty,
got away here to bring up her
four kids in a safe
place and bought a tiny
restaurant, the Lobster Pot.
Forty years later, the family
and about 100 hundred employees
serve 1,200 to 1,300 meals
a day during peak
season, prepared in the
back of the House by
six-month-a-year immigrants
from Jamaica.
McNulty insisted I find out
for myself for how many years
they had been coming, 21 years,
22 years.
You're the new champ, 24.
That beats everybody.
Provincetown has a year-round
population of just under 3,000,
which swells to 10,000 in
the summer.
Add the estimated four to five
million tourists that visit the
Cape every year, and you have
got the poster child
for peak demand.
JOY MCNULTY, Owner, Lobster
Pot: How do you run a business
where all your kids work for
you, all your grandchildren
work for you, and I don't
know if I can open next year?
How could you do that?
PAUL SOLMAN: The problem
is getting Americans, of
any vintage, to do the
back of the housework.
So businesses here rely on
foreigners, says Jane Nichols
Bishop, known as Mama Visa to
the workers.
JANE NICHOLS BISHOP, Owner, Peak
Season Workforce: In a seasonal
economy, there are usually not
enough American workers
to fill all of the jobs.
They're not year-round jobs.
So the Congress allowed
something called an H-2B.
PAUL SOLMAN: Which allows
half-year work if no
one else can be found,
and must be renewed
annually, for temporary
positions like hotel
housekeepers and
restaurant workers.
In the past, Congress has
made 66,000 of these visas
available annually nationwide.
And workers with previous H-2Bs,
like almost everyone here,
could return without being
counted against that
limit, but not this summer.
JANE NICHOLS BISHOP: Congress
didn't pass a returning worker
exemption in the continuing
resolution to fund the
government, which is
where it's always been.
And because they didn't
do that, the number
of visas available was
greatly restricted.
So there are not enough visas
for all the employers to
bring in their temporary work
force.
PAUL SOLMAN: The Department
of Homeland Security did add
another 15,000 visas last week.
But with the exemption
gone, the total number
of H-2Bs is way down.
And with employers now having
to prove irreparable harm to get
one of the additional visas, the
paperwork that might,
or might not, get a
worker in has mushroomed.
What an irony for a supposedly
anti-red tape administration,
says Congressman Bill Keating,
who represents the Cape, though,
of course, he's from a district
even bluer than its fish.
REP.
BILL KEATING (D),
Massachusetts: The fix is
staring us right in the face.
It's just raise the cap
on returning workers.
We have done it for
the last 11 years.
It works.
PAUL SOLMAN: But
they just did it now.
REP.
BILL KEATING: No, they didn't.
They created a whole new series
of regulations and requirements
that would scare any small
business person into not using
this because of politics.
PAUL SOLMAN: Really?
JOY MCNULTY: It's impossible to
run a business when you don't
know if you're getting 43 of
your 96 people.
The rest of them
are all Americans.
This year, we were
open six weeks late.
Last week, we opened
six weeks late.
Next year, we may
not open at all.
We don't know.
PAUL SOLMAN: Gui Yingling got
none of the requested 26 H-2B
workers for nearby Bubala's
By the Bay.
GUI YINGLING, Bubala's By the
Bay: It's been next impossible.
We have had to close days.
We have had to shorten hours.
PAUL SOLMAN: And a corollary
problem, say restaurateurs
like Yingling and Mac Hay of
Mac's Seafood, is that
if and when they close:
MAC HAY, Owner, Mac's Seafood:
I would have to lay off way
more than half of the work
force that I have now.
PAUL SOLMAN: American workers.
MAC HAY: An American work force.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, look, they
say, it's not for lack of
trying, to recruit natives, that
is.
In fact, the H-2B application
requires employers to
offer the jobs locally.
JOY MCNULTY: I advertise
on the Internet.
I advertise in every job fair.
We advertise in every newspaper.
Everyone on the entire
Cape knows that we're
all looking for help.
There's nobody here.
They will not take
seasonal dishwashing and
cook jobs for anything.
PAUL SOLMAN: But wait a second,
counters H-2B skeptic Jessica
Vaughan of the Center for
Immigration Studies.
JESSICA VAUGHAN, Center
for Immigration Studies:
I don't think there's
any such thing as a
job an American won't do.
There are millions of workers
in the United States who are
not employed, and we need to
find a way to match them
up with some of these
opportunities as well.
PAUL SOLMAN: Employers just
aren't trying hard enough,
Vaughan insists, while driving
down wages, and maybe
even working conditions.
More and more, she says,
teens and those with a high
school diploma at best:
JESSICA VAUGHAN: Employers
should look to those workers
first before they take the easy
route out, and bring in
workers from overseas.
MAC HAY: I have no
issue, no problem.
I would prefer to do that.
Trying to bring workers
from Jamaica or Mexico is
incredibly challenging,
incredibly expensive.
PAUL SOLMAN: Mac Hay worked in
kitchens on the Cape since he
was 12, now owns six businesses,
restaurants and seafood markets.
The pay?
MAC HAY: A dishwasher is
$12.50 to a cook can make $17,
$18 an hour, plus overtime.
PAUL SOLMAN: Not bad.
So why aren't these
summer jobs for students?
MAC HAY: The majority of
them leave August 12 or
August 13 or August 14.
We have a 10-week season.
It runs through Labor Day.
I can't lose more than half
my work force with three weeks
to go, with 30 percent of
my season left.
PAUL SOLMAN: And nonstudents
who are un- or under-employed?
MAC HAY: Americans, they
don't want to relocate
their life for six months.
They don't want to move down,
but if they're willing to do
it, I'm more than happy to hire
them.
PAUL SOLMAN: Like Joy McNulty
at the Lobster Pot, Mac Hay
utterly depends on visa workers.
Egan Bonny's been with
him for 10 seasons.
EGAN BONNY, Mac's Seafood: I do
cleaning, clean the restaurant
and do all kind of jobs
which no American kids
would come and do.
This grease job here,
fill the grease job.
No young kid's going to come
around and do this stuff.
Keep everything nice,
clean the bathroom.
PAUL SOLMAN: Because
they're spoiled?
EGAN BONNY: They're spoiled.
Seriously, they're spoiled.
PAUL SOLMAN: Really?
There is no wage at which
they would do these jobs?
GUI YINGLING: I have hired
every employee who has tried
to walk through the door.
I have advertised.
Most of them don't show up, is
the truth, once I hire them.
It's pretty incredible.
I have had 17 employees no-show
this season, after being hired.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, we did
run into one underemployed
American worker.
So what are you
doing this summer?
CLAIRE VAUGHAN, Student:
I'm working in a church
nursery every Sunday.
PAUL SOLMAN: And you have
applied for other jobs.
CLAIRE VAUGHAN:
Yes, that's right.
PAUL SOLMAN: And?
CLAIRE VAUGHAN: I have not
heard back from any of them.
PAUL SOLMAN: Seventeen-year
old Claire Vaughan lives
about two hours from the Cape.
PAUL SOLMAN: So now,
why aren't you here?
CLAIRE VAUGHAN: I didn't
know there were jobs here.
I had no idea you could do that.
PAUL SOLMAN: Claire Vaughan
happens to be the daughter
of our immigration skeptic.
CLAIRE VAUGHAN: Now
that I know about it,
I will definitely look.
PAUL SOLMAN: But it turned
that she, like most students,
would have to leave before
the season was over.
And her parents didn't want
her living on the Cape.
And so we come to
the bottom line.
Bubala's is down 10
percent and may actually
lose money this year.
Mac Hay worries about next year.
And the Lobster Pot?
In the six weeks it had to
close, it bought a lot fewer
lobsters from local fishermen,
hired fewer Americans
for fewer hours.
JOY MCNULTY: All of the
Americans are out of
work for six extra weeks.
The state doesn't get the
taxes, the vendors don't get
the work, nothing happens here,
and the town collapses.
But my people have been with me
for 20, 25 years, a lot of them.
What harm is that to anybody?
We just want to
run a restaurant.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the
"PBS NewsHour," this is
economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting
from Cape Cod.